Hi everyone.
Welcome to a talk about Matadisco, which is very
, very disco.
The first thing you need to know is that you might think
of me as Robin Bergen.
I don't know who has been spreading that rumor.
My name is actually Volker and I am giving that talk
because I am the creator of Matadisco.
Are we clear on this?
Yes.
Yes?
Okay, thank you.
So, you know, one thing that's pretty cool about
- have you heard of the AT protocol?
Some of you call it at proto for some reason - is
that it does like social stuff, but it's not just
social media.
And in fact, science is itself a social process and an
entirely democratic one.
And so we should also use social internet for science.
And we could disco with data.
What is the problem that this is looking at?
Well, it turns out that a lot of what happens around
science, apart from the science itself, sucks.
Data in the science universe is pretty bad.
There's a ton of really cool data.
Lots of people are sharing it in the open in all kinds
of ways, but like, it's all siloed
.
It's really hard to discover.
A lot of the servers are terribly slow.
The APIs don't work.
The portals are designed by, I think, grad students
, maybe not scientists.
So, you know, some of those things are pretty bad
.
And one of the big classics is, of course, like
all these scientists putting all their data on GitHub.
Because we all know that nothing bad happens on proprietary social media
platforms, right?
So anyway, we're trying to like, you know,
Tom Nicholas from Frost wrote this like really cool blog post about
it.
And it's important to think about this because you never know
when you're going to need it.
So one of the things I've worked on before, I
was a small part of the New York Times team that collected
data for the, you've probably sadly seen this, the
COVID tracker.
And what we had to do for that to work was scrape
data from like all over.
And that actually that the team got a Pulitzer Prize for
web scraping, which is quite interesting in and of itself.
Like the level at which this data was bad is terrible.
So like Italy, for instance, did a good job.
They put all their numbers on GitHub.
It was really easy.
It was JSON, et cetera.
In the US, most of the time data was per county
.
And those counties all had different systems.
So you had to have different scrapers per county at the
US level.
One of my favorite ones was France, which I worked on
a scraper for where like every day someone would get all
the numbers from all of France, paste them on the J
PEG with like a nice textured background and put the J
PEG on the web such that scraping that involved a lot
of processing to clean it up enough to OCR it to
get the data out.
And so this is the kind of situation where you do need
stuff.
And like more generally, even without COVID, you know,
like if you imagine the impact of making research better, like
every time we make it slightly better, scientists can science more
.
And so what does like good look like?
Well, so in that blog post I referenced earlier, like
you can think of like a number of properties that would be
pretty cool to have in, you know, sort of like
the scientific data space in terms of discovery of data repositories
, data sets, et cetera.
Um, and you know, you want it unified, everyone
can find it.
Of course it's free.
It works.
It works on any scale.
I'm not going to read through all of it, like
, but like all of these properties are pretty interesting.
And Volcker, um, has made a tool with the
IPF foundation called Matadisco.
And what Matadisco does is extremely simple.
It tracks data that gets published to all kinds of different,
um, data sets and data sources.
Currently it's limited to just a few because it's still
like ramping up.
But the idea is to put all the metadata around all,
everything that happens, everything that's published, um, directly
on AT Proto, such that then you can write apps
that just listen to, uh, whatever jet stream, whatever
's, whatever's convenient in terms of fire hoses for
you.
And then react to that and do things with that data,
pull it down, et cetera, knowing of course that,
um, all of this is nicely verified.
And so if you, if you think of the list of
properties that I, I, I produced earlier, well,
it hits quite a number of them, right?
You have something that's inherently social.
You can subscribe to it.
You have a right to exit because it's all on the
PDS.
That's part of the protocol.
And, you know, sustainably fundable.
Well, it's not very expensive, um, but like
we could, we could figure it out.
Um, and, and there's a few properties that it
doesn't completely hit, but in general, like simply by
pushing all this metadata about data sets to the, to the
protocol is getting a lot of these things working already.
And so, um, I made, you know, a
, a, a very simple, uh, demo of this
.
You can go on my GitHub, vmx.
github.
io/matterdiscoviewer.
It's all on the matterdisco.
org thing.
Um, and you know, this is just like tracking,
um, satellite images as they get published, as they get
pushed out and they come in directly on the fire hose and
you can display them directly.
Of course, this is not super interesting in and of itself
, but, um, we can, we can build stuff
on it.
And, you know, we're currently in the process of
integrating further sources.
This is like stuff from, uh, IIIF.
And so, you know, data, data sets, when
you talk about scientific data sets, people immediately think like satellite
images, dynamics, whatever.
But like, you know, they, we also have like
museum pieces, you know, cultural things like, um,
IIIF can do like sync between video and like, um
, notation stuff.
And so, yep, all of this, um, brought
together, go to matterdisco.
org.
It's brought to you by the lovely IPFS foundation.
And, uh, Ted has a question.
Um, hi, Volker.
Thanks for this.
This is really cool.
Um, uh, I was wondering if you'd seen the
sort of lensing work that Nick Jerkinis and,
uh, Blaine Cook and other folks have done.
Um, because if you get all this data up on protocol
, like being able to quickly translate into other formats would be
wild.
So I haven't seen that specific thing, but I,
I, I knew about the old Cambria stuff and Bl
aine has been, what's a nice word for harassing
, encouraging me, um, to, to, to have
a conversation with him, which is always a pleasure, of
course, uh, specifically about that.
So I, yeah, I really want to look at it
because the better we, we pump the source metadata in,
and of course those differ.
Um, so yeah, being able to lens them between,
between, between formats would be amazing.
Yep.
Um, Nick has it currently deployed actually.
So let's, let's, let's, let's
just, we can just do things.
Yeah.
We can just science and that's it.
Any other questions?
Yeah.
I just had a comment.
Wait, in the, in the, in the mic.
Yeah.
I'm a climate scientist and distributing data is a huge deal
for us.
And I, I, I, we can talk more about
it, but, uh, the customers who want, uh
, climate data and it'd be really great to do that
.
Yeah.
Um, the, you know, bring it our way.
One of the things that's great.
So like, as you know, there's ongoing epist
emic side in the U S and like a lot of people
have been trying to save data sets as fast as possible by
, by putting them on, on, on BitTor
rent.
What's difficult with that is you can't know if they
're publishing the real original thing or if it's been tam
pered with because it's very difficult.
I mean, there's currently no source to know, um
, what it was like with this, this, because 80
proto is built on data.
All brought to you by the IPFS foundation.
Um, uh, everything can have a CID.
So everything can be verified.
So it's, it becomes possible to load data, you
know, that, you know, and have like a public
, um, description of that, that gives you very far
verifiability built in.
Um, so I think this is, this is a win
for the next wave of, of epistemic side old
maniacs.
Have you thought about a T log over it?
Yeah.
And we could probably do a T log over it.
All these things compose.
Right.
Um, Hey, uh, how much data have you,
uh, uploaded to various PDS is enough to knock over
your sky.
PDS.
We're only pushing the metadata out, right?
We're not pushing because like some of these data sets are
insanely massive.
We would like knock over everything.
Um, but like we've pushed, I mean, I
don't know, like a hundred millions of records.
Um, if you, if you, if you look on
UFO, uh, meta disco is regularly in the top 10
lexicons, even though no one knows what it is
at this point.
So, yeah, any other takers?
Just go use it.
And yeah, if you want to onboard stuff, talk to
us.
Okay.
Thank you, Walker.
Thank you very much.